---
layout: post
title: Handling date and time in Python
date: 2020-02-14
category: programming
---

### The datetime module

The `datetime` module provides the following classes for processing date and
time information.

  1. `date`     
  2. `time`  
  3. `datetime`
  4. `timedelta`
  5. `tzinfo`
  
The syntax for importing the classes is `from datetime import <class>`.
  
For example, the `datetime` module can be imported by the following command.

```python
from datetime import datetime
```

## The datetime.datetime type

The first `datetime` is the module name. The second `datetime` is a type
defined in the module. This is a class which has

  - attributes
  - `datetime` objects
  - instance methods

The `datetime` objects have the following attributes:

  1. `year`
  2. `month`
  3. `day`
  4. `hour`
  5. `minute`
  6. `second`
  7. `microsecond` and
  8. `tzinfo`.
  
To create a `datetime` object, it's not necessary to provide all the attributes. 

+ A `datetime` object can be created by providing only `year`, `month`, and `day`
+ If not specified, `hour`, `minute`, `second`, and `microsecond` are set to zero
+ If not specified, `tzinfo` is set to `None`
  
`datetime.today()` returns the current date and time - upto microsecond. 
`today()` is one of the `datetime`objects. 

The statement `t1 = datetime.today()` creates an instance of `datetime.today()`
and assigns it to the variable `t1`.

```python
t1 = datetime.today()
t1
```
Output:

    datetime.datetime(2020, 2, 14, 12, 37, 35, 317779)

The individual attributes of a `datetime` object, like `year`, `month` etc can
be accessed using the dot notation.

```python
print("Year:", t1.year)
print("Month:", t1.month)
print("Day:", t1.day)
print("{}".format(t1.strftime('%A'))) ## See next section for an explanation
```

Output:

    Year: 2020
    Month: 2
    Day: 14
    Friday


## Finding day of the week

The day of the week can be found by using the instance method `weekday()`. It
returns an integer in the range 0 to 6 (both included), where 0 corresponds to
Monday, 1 corresponds to Tuesday, and so on.

```python
print(t1.weekday()) ## 4 corresponds to Friday
```
Output:

    4


This returns an integer that corresponds to a day of the week. If we want to
display the actual name of the weekday, we have to use the `strftime()` method.
As you will see, it reurns the string values corresponding to the integer
values returned by `datetime` objects.

## Formatting dates and times
As you might have noticed, the `datetime` module returns only integer values
even for day of the week and month. However, in many cases, we want the actual
names to be displayed like "January", "Monday" etc. The `strftime()` method
provides us a means to display `datetime` objects in multiple formats using
certain codes. The list of codes is give below.

  + **Formatting year**
    + **%y** - Last two numbers of the year e.g. 20
    + **%Y** - Full year e.g. 2020
    
  + **Formatting month**
    + **%b** - Month abbreviation e.g. Jan, Feb
    + **%B** - Month full name e.g. January, February
    
  + **Formatting day**
    + **%d** - Day of the month as a zero-padded integer e.g. 01, 02
    + **%a** - Weekday as abbreviated name e.g. Mon, Tue
    + **%A** - Weekday full name e.g. Monday, Tuesday
  
  + **Formatting hour, minute, and second**
    + **%H** - 24-hour clock
    + **%h** - 12-hour clock
    + **%M** - Minute as zero-padded decimal
    + **%S** - Second as zero-padded decimal
    + **%p** - Time in AM/PM format
  
**Examples:**

```python
eclipse_time = datetime(2020, 6, 21, 10, 24)
print("The next solar eclipse visible from India is on {}.".format(eclipse_time))
print("The next solar eclipse visible from India is on {}.".format(eclipse_time.strftime('%b %d, %Y')))
print("The next solar eclipse visible from India is on {}.".format(eclipse_time.strftime('%A %B %d, %Y')))
print("The next solar eclipse visible from India is at {}".format(eclipse_time.strftime('%H:%M %p')), "on {}.".format(eclipse_time.strftime('%A %B %d, %Y')))
```
Output:

    The next solar eclipse visible from India is on 2020-06-21 10:24:00.
    The next solar eclipse visible from India is on Jun 21, 2020.
    The next solar eclipse visible from India is on Sunday June 21, 2020.
    The next solar eclipse visible from India is at 10:24 AM on Sunday June 21, 2020.


## Comparing `datetime` objects

`datetime` objects can be compared like using the standard operators. Between two dates, the older one is considered to be *lesser*. For exacmple, your previous birthday is *lesser* than your current year's birthday.


```python
bday_previous = datetime(2019, 6, 8) #Creating a datetime object for your birthday in 2019
bday_current = datetime(2020, 6, 8) #Creating a datetime object for current year's birthday

bday_previous < bday_current
```
Output:

    True

To compare two `datetime` objects, Python compares the values of the individual
attributes until the given condition is true.

As an example, let's compare two `datetime` objects with the following
attribute values. We want to know if `t1` is less than `t2`.


```python
t1 = datetime(1985, 1, 1, 11, 22, 45, 0)
t2 = datetime(1985, 1, 1, 11, 23, 45, 100000)

t1 < t2
``` 
Output:

    True

Checking for this condition involves the following steps.

  1. Compare `year` values. They are equal. Move to `month`.
  2. Compare `month` values. They are equal. Move to `day`.
  3. Compare `day` values. They are **not** equal and `t1.day < t2.day`
  4. Halt
  
  The condition we want to check is satisfied in the `day` attribute, and the
program execution stops there.  The rest of the atrributes are not even
considered.
  
  This method works for comparing date and time values ***only if*** the
attributes are arranged in the order:
  
  `year`, `month`, `day`, `hour`, `minute`, `second`, `microsecond`.

## Finding elapsed time

A `datetime` object represents a particular instant of time, upto a
microsecond. We can find the duration between two time instants by finding the
difference between their corresponding `datetime` objects. Interestingly, this
operation returns a value that is of type `timedelta`. Yes, you read it right: 

> Subtracting one `datetime` object from another `datetime` object returns a
> `timedelta` object.

`datetime1 - datetime2 = timedelta`

```python
t2 - t1
```
Output:

    datetime.timedelta(0, 60, 100000)

Note that we can get the elapsed time only in terms of days, seconds, and
microseconds. This is because, `timedelta` objects have only three attributes,
and they are,

  1. `days`
  2. `seconds`
  3. `microsecond`

To drive this point home, let's consider a different example.


```python
t3 = datetime(1990, 6, 8)
t4 = datetime.today()
delta_t = t4 - t3
delta_t
```
Output:

    datetime.timedelta(10843, 36913, 818363)

`t4 - t3` returns the elapsed time since June 8, 1990, 00:00:00. Specifically,
it returns elapsed days, seconds, and milliseconds. If you try to directly pull
out the number of years since `t3`, you will get an error because `year` is not
an attribute of a `timedelta` object.


```python
delta_t.year
```
Output:

    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    AttributeError                            Traceback (most recent call last)

    <ipython-input-12-bb65e368b0e0> in <module>
    ----> 1 delta_t.year
    

    AttributeError: 'datetime.timedelta' object has no attribute 'year'


However, it's easy to pull out the `days`, `seconds`, `microseconds` values.


```python
print(delta_t.days)
print(delta_t.seconds)
print(delta_t.microseconds)
```
Output:

    10843
    36913
    818363


While two `datetime` objects can be subtracted from each other, there is no
provision to add two `datetime` objects. However, we can add a `timedelta`
object to a `datetime` object.

Given below is a summary of operations supported by `datetime` objects.

  1. Two `datetime` objects can be compared using relational operators
  2. Two `datetime` objects can be subtracted from each other. This returns a
     `timedelta` object
  3. A `datetime` object can be added to a `timedelta` object. This returns a
     `datetime` object
  4. Two `datetime` objects can not be added

***References***
  1. Allen Downey. *Think Python. How to Think Like a Computer Scientist*.
     Green Tea Press, Needham, Massachusetts
  2. Python 3.8.2rc1 documentation.
     https://docs.python.org/3/library/datetime.html#module-datetime. Accessed
on February, 14, 2020.
  3. Katernya Koidan. *How to work with Python Date and Time Objects.*
     https://academy.vertabelo.com/blog/python-datetime-for-beginners/ Accessed
on February 14, 2020.
  4. Time and Date.
     https://www.timeanddate.com/eclipse/in/india/dehradun?iso=20200621
Accessed on February 14, 2020
